so in college I was a government major
which means I had to write a lot of
papers now when a normal student writes
a paper they might spread the work out a
little like this so you know you get
started maybe a little slowly but you
get enough done in the first week that
with some heavier days later on
everything gets done things stay civil
and I would want to do that like that
that would be the plan I would I would
have it all ready to go but then then
that actually the paper would come along
and then I would kind of do this and
that would happen every single paper but
then came my 90 page senior thesis paper
you're supposed to spend a year on I
knew for a paper like that my normal
workflow was not an option it was way
too big a project so I planned things
out and I decided I kind of had to go
something like this this is how the year
would go so I'd start off light and I'd
bump it up in the middle months and then
at the end I would kick it up into high
gear stick a little staircase how hard
could it be just walk up the stairs no
big deal right but then funniest thing
happened those first few months they
came and went and I couldn't quite do
stuff so we had an awesome new revised
plan and then
but then those middle months actually
went by and I didn't really write words
and so we were here and then two months
turned into one month she turned into
two weeks and one day I woke up with
three days until the deadline still not
having written a word and so I did the
only thing I could I wrote 90 pages over
72 hours pulling not one but two
all-nighters humans are not supposed to
pulled two all-nighters sprinted across
campus Dovan slow motion and got it in
just at the deadline I thought that was
the end of everything but a week later I
get a call it's the school and they say
is this Tim ribbon and I say yeah and
they say we need to talk about your
thesis and I say okay and they say it's
the best one we've ever seen
that did not happen it was a very very
bad thesis I just wanted to enjoy that
one moment when all of you thought this
guy is amazing no no it was very very
bad
anyway today I'm a writer blogger guy I
write the blog wait but why and a couple
of years ago I decided to write about
procrastination my behaviors always
perplexed the non procrastinators around
me and I wanted to explain to the non
procrastinators of the world what goes
on in the heads of procrastinators and
why we are the way we are now I had a
hypothesis that the the brains of
procrastinators were actually different
than the brains of other people and to
test this I found an MRI lab that
actually let me scan both my brain and
the brain of a proven non procrastinator
and I could compare them and I actually
brought them here to show you today and
I want you to take a look carefully to
see if you can notice a difference and I
know that if you're not a trained brain
expert it's not that obvious but just
take a look okay so here's the brain of
a non procrastinator
now here's my brain
there is a difference both brains have a
rational decision-maker in them but the
procrastinators brain also has an
instant gratification monkey now what
does this mean for the procrastinator
well it means everything's fine
until this happens so the rational
decision-maker will make the rational
decision to do something productive but
the monkey doesn't like that plan so he
or she takes the wheel and he says
actually let's read the entire Wikipedia
page of the nancy kerrigan tonya
harding's scandal because i just
remember that that happened then then
we're gonna go over to the fridge we're
gonna see if it's anything new in there
since 10 minutes ago after that we're
gonna go on a YouTube spiral that starts
with videos of Richard Fineman talking
about magnets and ends much much later
with us watching interviews with Justin
Bieber's mom oh that's gonna take a
while so we're not gonna really have
room on the schedule for any work today
sorry now what is going on here this
degraph ocation monkey does not seem
like a guy you want behind the wheel he
lives entirely in the present moment he
has no memory of the past no knowledge
of the future and he only cares about
two things easy and fun now in the
animal world that works fine if you're a
dog and you spend your whole life doing
nothing other than easy and fun things
you're a huge success and to the monkey
humans are just another animal species
is to keep well slept well fed and
propagating into the next generation
which in tribal times might have worked
ok but if you haven't noticed now we're
not in tribal times we're in an advanced
civilization and the monkey does not
know what that is which is why we have
another guy in our brain the rational
decision-maker
who gives us the ability to do things no
other animal can do we can visualize the
future we can see the big picture we can
make long-term plans and he wants to
take all of that into account and he
wants to just have us do whatever makes
sense to be doing right now now
sometimes it makes sense to be doing
things that are easy and fun like when
you're having dinner or going to bed or
enjoying well or in leisure time that's
why there's an overlap sometimes they
agree but other times it makes much more
sense to be doing things that are harder
and less pleasant for the sake of the
big picture and that's when we have a
conflict and for the procrastinator that
conflict tends to end a certain way
every time
leaving him spending a lot of time in
this orange zone an easy and fun place
that's entirely out of the makes sense
circle I call it the dark playground now
the dark playground is a place that all
of you procrastinators out there know
very well
it's where leisure activities happen at
times when leisure activities are not
supposed to be happening the fun you
have in the dark playground isn't
actually fun because it's completely
unearned and the air is filled with
guilt dread anxiety self-hatred all
those good procrastinator feelings and
the question is in this situation with
the monkey behind the wheel how does the
procrastinator ever get himself over
here to this blue zone a less pleasant
place but we're really important things
happen well turns out that the
procrastinator has a guardian angel
someone who's always looking down on him
and watching over him in his darkest
moments someone called the panic monster
now the panic Monster is dormant most of
the time but he suddenly wakes up
anytime a deadline gets too close or
there's danger of public embarrassment a
career disaster or some other scary
consequence and importantly he's the
only thing that the monkey is terrified
of now
he became very relevant in my life
pretty recently because people have ted
reached out to me about six months ago
and invited me to do a TED talk now of
course I said yes it's always been a
dream of mine to have done a TED talk in
the past
[Applause]
but in the middle of all this excitement
the rational decision makers seem to
have something else in his mind he was
saying we clear on what we just accepted
do we get what's going to be now
happening one day in the future we need
to sit down and work on this right now
and the monkey said totally agree but
also let's just open Google Earth and
live zooming to the bottom of India like
200 feet above the ground we're gonna
scroll up for two and a half hours till
we get to the top of the country so we
can get a better feel for India so
that's what we did that day as six
months turned into four and then two and
then one the people of Ted decided to
release the speakers and I opened up the
website and there was my face staring
right back at me
and guess who woke up so the panic
monster starts losing his mind and a few
seconds later the whole systems in
mayhem
and the monkey who remember he's
terrified of the panic monster boom he's
up the tree and finally finally the
rational decision-maker can take the
wheel and I can start working on the
talk now the panic monster explains all
kinds of pretty insane procrastinator
behavior like how someone like me could
spend two weeks unable to start the
opening sentence of a paper and then
miraculously find the unbelievable worth
work I think to stay up all night and
write eight pages and this entire
situation with the three characters this
is the procrastinators system it's not
pretty but in the end it works and this
is what I decided to write about on the
blog just a couple years ago now when I
did I was amazed by the response
literally thousands of emails came in
from all different kinds of people from
all over the world doing all different
kinds of things these were people who
were nurses and bankers and painters and
engineers and lots and lots of PhD
students and they were all writing
saying the same thing I have this
problem too but what struck me was the
contrast between the light tone of the
post and the heaviness of these emails
these people were writing with intense
frustration about what procrastination
had done to their lives about what this
monkey had done to them and I thought
about this and I said let the
procrastinator system works than what's
going on why are all these people in
such a dark place well turns out that
there's two kinds of procrastination
everything I've talked about today the
examples I've given they all have
deadlines when there's deadlines the
effects of procrastination are contained
to the short term because the panic
monster gets involved but there's a
second kind of procrastination that
happens in situations when there is no
deadline so if you want to have a career
we want to be a self-starter something
in the arts something entrepreneurial
there's no deadlines on those things at
first because nothing's happening at
first not until you've gone out and done
the hard work to get some momentum to
get things going there's also all kinds
of important things outside of your
career that don't involve any deadlines
like seeing your family or exercising
and taking care of your health working
on your relationship or get
out of a relationship that isn't working
now if the crafts inator is only
mechanism of doing these hard things is
the panic monster that's a problem
because in all of these non deadline
situations the panic monster doesn't
show up he's nothing to wake up for so
the effects of procrastination they're
not contained they just extend outward
forever and it's this long-term kind of
procrastination that's much less visible
and much less talked about than the
funnier short term deadlines based kind
it's usually suffered quietly and
privately and it can be the source of a
huge amount of long-term unhappiness and
regrets and I thought you know that's
why these people are emailing and that's
why they're in such a bad place it's not
that they're cramming for some project
it's that long term procrastination is
made them feel like a spectator at times
in their own lives
you know the frustration was not that
they couldn't achieve their dreams it's
that they weren't even able to start
chasing them so I read these emails and
I had a little bit of an epiphany that I
don't think non procrastinators exist
that's right I think all of you are
procrastinators now you might not all be
a mess like some of us and some of you
may have a healthy relationship with
deadlines but remember the monkeys
sneakiest trick is when the deadlines
aren't there now I want to show you one
last thing I call this a life calendar
that's one box for every week of a
90-year life not that many boxes
especially since we've already used a
bunch of those so I think we need to all
take a long hard look at that calendar
we need to think about what we're really
procrastinating on because everyone is
procrastinating on something in life we
need to stay aware of the instant
gratification monkey that's a job for
all of us and because it's not that many
boxes on there it's a job that should
probably start today well maybe not
today
you know sometime soon thank you
[Applause]